FEATURES.md, before:

# apt-mirror.py - New Features and Improvements

## Core Improvements

### 1. **Async Architecture**
- **Full async/await support** using Python's `asyncio`
- **Concurrent downloads** using `aiohttp` for true async HTTP
- **Non-blocking I/O** using `asyncio.to_thread()` for file operations
- **Better resource utilization** - no process forking overhead

### 2. **Diff Serving (NEW)**
- **Generate binary diffs** between file versions using `xdelta3`
- **Serve diffs alongside complete files** to reduce bandwidth
- **Configurable diff algorithm**: xdelta3, bsdiff, or rsync
- **Smart diff sizing**: Only create diffs if they're smaller than a threshold (default 50% of original)
- **Version tracking**: Maintains JSON database of file versions for diff generation

**Configuration:**
```
set enable_diffs 1
set diff_algorithm xdelta3
set diff_storage_path $base_path/diffs
set max_diff_size_ratio 0.5
```

### 3. **Enhanced Progress Reporting**
- **Real-time progress** with speed, ETA, and percentage
- **Per-stage tracking** (release, index, archive)
- **Human-readable sizes** (KiB, MiB, GiB)
- **Time estimates** for completion

### 4. **Better Error Handling**
- **Automatic retries** with exponential backoff
- **Resume partial downloads** (Range requests)
- **Checksum verification** (optional but recommended)
- **Detailed error messages** with context

### 5. **Improved Configuration**
- **Backward compatible** with existing `mirror.list` format
- **New options**:
  - `enable_diffs`: Enable/disable diff generation
  - `diff_algorithm`: Choose diff tool (xdelta3/bsdiff/rsync)
  - `retry_attempts`: Number of retry attempts (default: 5)
  - `retry_delay`: Base delay between retries (default: 2.0s)
  - `verify_checksums`: Verify file checksums after download
  - `resume_partial_downloads`: Resume interrupted downloads

## Additional Suggested Features

### 6. **Bandwidth Management**
- **Rate limiting** per connection (already supported via limit_rate)
- **Connection pooling** with configurable limits
- **Priority queues** for different file types

### 7. **Mirror Health Monitoring**
- **Last update tracking** per repository
- **File integrity checks** on existing files
- **Statistics collection** (download speeds, error rates)
- **Health check reports** in JSON format

### 8. **Selective Mirroring**
- **Filter by package name** patterns
- **Filter by architecture** (already supported)
- **Filter by component** (already supported)
- **Filter by file size** (skip very large files)

### 9. **Incremental Updates**
- **Smart change detection** using checksums
- **Only download changed files** (already implemented)
- **Metadata-only updates** option
- **Delta updates** using diffs (NEW)

### 10. **Web Interface (Future)**
- **REST API** for mirror status
- **Web dashboard** for monitoring
- **Configuration management** via web UI
- **Download statistics** visualization

### 11. **Multi-Mirror Support**
- **Mirror from multiple sources** simultaneously
- **Load balancing** across mirrors
- **Failover** if one mirror is unavailable
- **Merge multiple mirrors** into one

### 12. **Compression Options**
- **On-the-fly compression** of stored files
- **Configurable compression levels**
- **Support for different algorithms** (gzip, bz2, xz, zstd)

### 13. **Security Enhancements**
- **GPG signature verification** of Release files
- **Checksum verification** for all files (optional)
- **Secure transport** enforcement (HTTPS only option)
- **Access control** for mirror access

### 14. **Performance Optimizations**
- **Connection reuse** (already implemented via aiohttp)
- **HTTP/2 support** (via aiohttp)
- **Parallel metadata parsing**
- **Caching** of parsed Release files

### 15. **Logging and Monitoring**
- **Structured logging** (JSON format option)
- **Log rotation** with size limits
- **Integration with systemd journal**
- **Metrics export** (Prometheus format)

## Migration from Perl Version

The Python version is **fully backward compatible** with the Perl version:

1. **Same configuration format** - `mirror.list` works as-is
2. **Same directory structure** - uses same paths and organization
3. **Same output format** - compatible with existing postmirror scripts
4. **Drop-in replacement** - can replace Perl script directly

## Performance Comparison

Expected improvements over Perl version:
- **20-30% faster** downloads due to better async I/O
- **Lower memory usage** - no process forking overhead
- **Better CPU utilization** - true async vs process-based parallelism
- **Faster startup** - no Perl module loading overhead

## Dependencies

All dependencies are available in Debian/Ubuntu repositories:
- `python3` (standard library)
- `python3-aiohttp` (apt package)
- `xdelta3` (apt package, for diffs)

No virtual environments or pip installs required!

Commit message:

Update documentation to clarify diff generation capabilities and usage
- Changed references from "diff serving" to "diff generation" for accuracy.
- Added important notes in INSTALL.md, README.md, and FEATURES.md to specify that standard APT clients do not support diffs and that the feature is intended for custom tools only.
- Enhanced CHANGELOG to reflect the updated description of diff generation capabilities.

FEATURES.md, after:

# apt-mirror.py - New Features and Improvements

## Core Improvements

### 1. **Async Architecture**
- **Full async/await support** using Python's `asyncio`
- **Concurrent downloads** using `aiohttp` for true async HTTP
- **Non-blocking I/O** using `asyncio.to_thread()` for file operations
- **Better resource utilization** - no process forking overhead

### 2. **Diff Generation (NEW)**
- **Generate binary diffs** between file versions using `xdelta3`
- **Store diffs alongside complete files** for custom use cases
- **Configurable diff algorithm**: xdelta3, bsdiff, or rsync
- **Smart diff sizing**: Only create diffs if they're smaller than a threshold (default 50% of original)
- **Version tracking**: Maintains JSON database of file versions for diff generation

**Important Note**: Standard APT clients do **not** support diffs. APT downloads complete `.deb` files as documented in the [Debian SourcesList wiki](https://wiki.debian.org/SourcesList). The diff feature is only useful for:
- Custom tools or scripts that can download and apply diffs
- Bandwidth analysis and comparison
- Manual file reconstruction from diffs

To serve diffs, you must configure your web server (nginx/apache) to serve the `diff_storage_path` directory, and clients must implement custom logic to download and apply diffs using tools like `xdelta3`.

**Configuration:**
```
set enable_diffs 1
set diff_algorithm xdelta3
set diff_storage_path $base_path/diffs
set max_diff_size_ratio 0.5
```

### 3. **Enhanced Progress Reporting**
- **Real-time progress** with speed, ETA, and percentage
- **Per-stage tracking** (release, index, archive)
- **Human-readable sizes** (KiB, MiB, GiB)
- **Time estimates** for completion

### 4. **Better Error Handling**
- **Automatic retries** with exponential backoff
- **Resume partial downloads** (Range requests)
- **Checksum verification** (optional but recommended)
- **Detailed error messages** with context

### 5. **Improved Configuration**
- **Backward compatible** with existing `mirror.list` format
- **New options**:
  - `enable_diffs`: Enable/disable diff generation
  - `diff_algorithm`: Choose diff tool (xdelta3/bsdiff/rsync)
  - `retry_attempts`: Number of retry attempts (default: 5)
  - `retry_delay`: Base delay between retries (default: 2.0s)
  - `verify_checksums`: Verify file checksums after download
  - `resume_partial_downloads`: Resume interrupted downloads

## Additional Suggested Features

### 6. **Bandwidth Management**
- **Rate limiting** per connection (already supported via limit_rate)
- **Connection pooling** with configurable limits
- **Priority queues** for different file types

### 7. **Mirror Health Monitoring**
- **Last update tracking** per repository
- **File integrity checks** on existing files
- **Statistics collection** (download speeds, error rates)
- **Health check reports** in JSON format

### 8. **Selective Mirroring**
- **Filter by package name** patterns
- **Filter by architecture** (already supported)
- **Filter by component** (already supported)
- **Filter by file size** (skip very large files)

### 9. **Incremental Updates**
- **Smart change detection** using checksums
- **Only download changed files** (already implemented)
- **Metadata-only updates** option
- **Delta updates** using diffs (NEW)

### 10. **Web Interface (Future)**
- **REST API** for mirror status
- **Web dashboard** for monitoring
- **Configuration management** via web UI
- **Download statistics** visualization

### 11. **Multi-Mirror Support**
- **Mirror from multiple sources** simultaneously
- **Load balancing** across mirrors
- **Failover** if one mirror is unavailable
- **Merge multiple mirrors** into one

### 12. **Compression Options**
- **On-the-fly compression** of stored files
- **Configurable compression levels**
- **Support for different algorithms** (gzip, bz2, xz, zstd)

### 13. **Security Enhancements**
- **GPG signature verification** of Release files
- **Checksum verification** for all files (optional)
- **Secure transport** enforcement (HTTPS only option)
- **Access control** for mirror access

### 14. **Performance Optimizations**
- **Connection reuse** (already implemented via aiohttp)
- **HTTP/2 support** (via aiohttp)
- **Parallel metadata parsing**
- **Caching** of parsed Release files

### 15. **Logging and Monitoring**
- **Structured logging** (JSON format option)
- **Log rotation** with size limits
- **Integration with systemd journal**
- **Metrics export** (Prometheus format)

## Migration from Perl Version

The Python version is **fully backward compatible** with the Perl version:

1. **Same configuration format** - `mirror.list` works as-is
2. **Same directory structure** - uses same paths and organization
3. **Same output format** - compatible with existing postmirror scripts
4. **Drop-in replacement** - can replace Perl script directly

## Performance Comparison

Expected improvements over Perl version:
- **20-30% faster** downloads due to better async I/O
- **Lower memory usage** - no process forking overhead
- **Better CPU utilization** - true async vs process-based parallelism
- **Faster startup** - no Perl module loading overhead

## Dependencies

All dependencies are available in Debian/Ubuntu repositories:
- `python3` (standard library)
- `python3-aiohttp` (apt package)
- `xdelta3` (apt package, for diffs)

No virtual environments or pip installs required!
